add data-structures dir with rlp page (#5758)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/data-structures/ssz/index.md

---
title: Simple Serialize
description: Explanation of Ethereum's SSZ format.
lang: en
sidebar: true
sidebarDepth: 2
---

> **Simple serialize (SSZ)** is the serialization method used on the Beacon Chain. It replaces the RLP serialization used on the execution layer everywhere across the consensus layer except the peer discovery protocol. SSZ is designed to be deterministic and compatible with merkleization.

Author: ok, tried to update the intro with this in mind:

**Simple serialize (SSZ)** is the serialization method used on the Beacon Chain. It replaces the RLP serialization used on the execution layer everywhere across the consensus layer except the peer discovery protocol. SSZ is designed to be deterministic and also to Merkleize efficiently. SSZ can be thought of as having two components: a serialization scheme and a Merkleization scheme that is designed to work efficiently with the serialized data structure.

> Simple serialize (SSZ) is the serialization method used on the Beacon Chain. It replaces the RLP serialization used on the execution layer everywhere across the consensus layer except the peer discovery protocol. SSZ is specifically designed to be deterministic and compatible with Merkleization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Simple serialize (SSZ)** is the serialization method used on the Beacon Chain. It replaces the RLP serialization used on the execution layer everywhere across the consensus layer except the peer discovery protocol. SSZ is designed to be deterministic and compatible with merkleization.
```

> Simple serialize (SSZ) is the serialization method used on the Beacon Chain. It replaces the RLP serialization used on the execution layer everywhere across the consensus layer except the peer discovery protocol. SSZ is specifically designed to be deterministic and compatible with Merkleization.

Reviewer: Is there a concise way to describe SSZ that we could add to this? We're currently on describing where it is used and what it replaces.

## How does SSZ work? {#how-does-ssz-work}

> ### Serialization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Serialization {#serialization}
```

> ### Serialization {#serialization}

Author: add "SSZ is a serialization scheme that is not self-describing - rather it relies on a schema that must be known in advance."

> The goal of SSZ serialization is to represent objects of arbitrary complexity as strings of bytes. Each bytestring has a fixed length (32 bytes) called a chunk. These chunks directly become leaves in the Merkle tree representing the object.

Author: ok, thanks

> Ultimately the goal of SSZ serialization is to represent objects of arbitrary complexity as strings of bytes. Each bytestring has a fixed length (32 bytes) called a chunk. These chunks directly become leaves in the Merkle tree representing the object.

Reviewer: > Ultimately the goal of SSZ serialization

Is it incorrect to just say 'the goal of SSZ'?

Author: nah that is much better. Updating now.

This is a very simple process for "basic types". The element is simply converted to hexadecimal bytes and then right-padded until its length is equal to 32 bytes (little-endian representation). Basic types include:

- unsigned integers
- Booleans

> For complex "composite" types, serialization is more complicated because the composite type contains multiple elements that might have different types or different sizes, or both. For example, vectors contain elements of uniform type but varying size. Where these objects all have fixed lengths (i.e. the size of the elements is always going to be constant irrespective of their actual values) the serialization is simply a conversion of each element in the composite type ordered into little-endian bytestrings. These bytestrings are joined together and padded to the nearest multiple of 32-bytes. The serialized object has the bytelist representation of the fixed-length elements in the same order as they appear in the deserialized object.

Reviewer 2: re "vectors contain elements of uniform type but varying size": they could contain varying size if the type itself is a variable-width size but not necessarily. The wording was a bit confusing for me at first until I understood what you're trying to convey.

Reviewer 2: "padded to the nearest multiple of 32-bytes" also here I'd move this to merkleization

Author: ok deleted both parts, hopefully clearer now.

> For more complex "composite" types the serialization is not quite so straightforward. This is because the composite type contains multiple elements that miught have different types or different sizes, or both. Vectors, for example, contain elements of uniform type but varying size. Where these objects all have fixed lengths (i.e. the size of the elements is always going to be constant irrespective of their actual values) the serialization is simply a conversion of each element in the composite type in order into little-endian bytestrings. These bytestrings are joined together and padded to the nearest multiple of 32-bytes. The serialized object has the bytelist representation of the fixed-length elements in the same order as they appear in the deserialized object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For complex "composite" types, serialization is more complicated because the composite type contains multiple elements that might have different types or different sizes, or both. For example, vectors contain elements of uniform type but varying size. Where these objects all have fixed lengths (i.e. the size of the elements is always going to be constant irrespective of their actual values) the serialization is simply a conversion of each element in the composite type ordered into little-endian bytestrings. These bytestrings are joined together and padded to the nearest multiple of 32-bytes. The serialized object has the bytelist representation of the fixed-length elements in the same order as they appear in the deserialized object.
```

> For types with variable lengths, the actual data is replecaed by an "offset" value in that element's position in the serialized object. The actual data is then added to a heap at the end of the serialized object. The offset value is the index for the start of the actual data in the heap, acting like a pointer to the relevant bytes.
> 
> The example below illustrates how the offsetting works for an container with both fixed and variable length elements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For types with variable lengths, the actual data gets replaced by an "offset" value in that element's position in the serialized object. The actual data gets added to a heap at the end of the serialized object. The offset value is the index for the start of the actual data in the heap, acting as a pointer to the relevant bytes.

The example below illustrates how the offsetting works for a container with both fixed and variable-length elements:
```

```Rust

    struct Dummy {

        number: u64,
        number2: u64,
        vector: Vec<u8>
        number3: u64
    }

>     dummy = Dummy{

Reviewer: Not familiar with rust. Is this formatting correct?

Author: the syntax is ok, but I missed a comma and had a name inconsistency between `number` and `number1` - now fixed.

                              vector                   vector

```

divided over lines for clarity:

```
[
  37, 0, 0, 0,  # little-endian encoding of `number1`.
  55, 0, 0, 0,  # little-endian encoding of `number2`.
  16, 0, 0, 0,  # The "offset" that indicates where the value of `vector` starts (little-endian 16).
  22, 0, 0, 0,  # little-endian encoding of `number3`.
  1, 2, 3, 4,   # The actual values in `vector`.
]
```

This is still a simplification - the integers and zeros in the schematics above would actually be stored bytelists, like this:

```
[
  10100101000000000000000000000000  # little-endian encoding of `number1`
  10110111000000000000000000000000  # little-endian encoding of `number2`.
  10010000000000000000000000000000  # The "offset" that indicates where the value of `vector` starts (little-endian 16).
  10010110000000000000000000000000  # little-endian encoding of `number3`.
  10000001100000101000001110000100   # The actual value of the `bytes` field.
]
```

So the actual values for variable-length types are stored in a heap at the end of the serialized object with their offsets stored in their correct positions in the ordered list of fields.

> There are also some special cases that require spoecific treatment, such as the `BitList` typoe that requires a length cap to be added during serialization and removed during deserialization. Full details are available in the [SSZ spec](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/ssz/simple-serialize.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are also some special cases that require specific treatment, such as the `BitList` type that requires a length cap to be added during serialization and removed during deserialization. Full details are available in the [SSZ spec](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/ssz/simple-serialize.md).
```

### Deserialization {#deserialization}

To deserialize this object requires the <b>schema</b>. The schema defines the precise layout of the serialized data so that each specific element can be deserialized from a blob of bytes into some meaningful object with the elements having the right type, value, size and position. It is the schema that tells the deserializer which values are actual values and which ones are offsets. All field names disappear when an object is serialized, but reinstantiated on deserialization according to the schema.

> NB See [ssz.dev](https://www.ssz.dev/overview) for an interactive explainer on this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See [ssz.dev](https://www.ssz.dev/overview) for an interactive explainer on this.
```

## Merkleization {#merkleization}

> This SSZ serialized object can then be merkleized - that is transformed into a Merkle-tree representation of the same data. First, the number of 32-byte chunks in the serialized object is determined. These are the "leaves" of the tree. The total number of leaves must be a power of 2 so that hashign together the leaves eventually produces a single hash-tree-root. If this is not naturally the case, additional leaves containing 32 bytes of zeros are added. Diagramatically:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This SSZ serialized object can then be merkleized - that is transformed into a Merkle-tree representation of the same data. First, the number of 32-byte chunks in the serialized object is determined. These are the "leaves" of the tree. The total number of leaves must be a power of 2 so that hashing together the leaves eventually produces a single hash-tree-root. If this is not naturally the case, additional leaves containing 32 bytes of zeros are added. Diagrammatically:
```

```
        hash tree root
            /     \
           /       \
          /         \
         /           \
   hash of leaves  hash of leaves
     1 and 2         3 and 4
      /   \            /  \
     /     \          /    \
    /       \        /      \
 leaf1     leaf2  leaf3     leaf4
```

> There are also cases where the leaves of the tree do not naturally evenly distribute in the way they do int he exampel above. For example, leaf 4 could be a container with multiple elements that require additional "depth" to be added to the Merkle tree, creating an uneven tree.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are also cases where the leaves of the tree do not naturally evenly distribute in the way they do in the example above. For example, leaf 4 could be a container with multiple elements that require additional "depth" to be added to the Merkle tree, creating an uneven tree.
```

Instead of referring to these tree elements as leaf X, node X etc, we can give them generalized indices, starting with root = 1 and counting from left to right along each level. This is the generalized index explained above. Each element in the serialized list has a generalized index equal to `2**depth + idx` where idx is its zero-indexed position in the serialized object and the depth is the number of levels in the Merkle tree, which can be determined as the square root of the number of elements (leaves).

## Generalized indices {#generalized-indices}

> A generalized index is an integer that represents a node in a binary merkle tree where each node has a generalized index `2 ** depth + index in row`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A generalized index is an integer that represents a node in a binary Merkle tree where each node has a generalized index `2 ** depth + index in row`.
```

```
        1           --depth = 0  2**0 + 0 = 1
    2       3       --depth = 1  2**1 + 0 = 2, 2**1+1 = 3
  4   5   6   7     --depth = 2  2**2 + 0 = 4, 2**2 + 1 = 5...

```

> This representation yields a node index for each piece of data in the merkle tree.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This representation yields a node index for each piece of data in the Merkle tree.
```
